.TH PURITY-NG 6 "January 7, 2011" 
.SH NAME
.PP
purity-ng - general purpose purity testing software
.SH SYNOPSIS
.PP
\f[B]purity-ng\f[] [\f[I]OPTION\f[]]\&...
list|\f[I]FILE\f[]|\f[I]TESTNAME\f[]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
Purity is an interactive purity test program with a simple, user
interface and datafile format.
For each test, questions are printed to the your terminal, and you
are prompted for an answer to the current question.
At a prompt, these are your choices:
.PP
\f[CR]
      y\ \ \ \ \ \ Answer\ "yes"\ to\ the\ question.
      
      n\ \ \ \ \ \ Answer\ "no"\ to\ the\ question.
      
      b\ \ \ \ \ \ Backup\ \ one\ \ question,\ if\ you\ answered\ it\ incorrectly,\ or\ someone\ is\ watching\ you\ take\ the\ test,\ and\ you\ don\[aq]t\ (or\ do)\ want\ to\ admit\ a\ different\ answer.
      
      s\ \ \ \ \ \ Print\ your\ current\ score\ on\ the\ test\ you\ are\ taking.
      
      q\ \ \ \ \ \ Quit\ the\ test,\ and\ print\ the\ current\ score.
      
      ?\ \ \ \ \ \ Print\ a\ help\ screen\ for\ the\ current\ prompt.
\f[]
.PP
At the end of the test, your score is printed out.
For most purity tests, lower scores denote more
\[lq]experience\[rq] of the test material.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \[em]version
print current version of \f[B]purity-ng\f[]
.RS
.RE
.TP
.B -h, --help
show the help message and exit
.RS
.RE
.TP
.B -p
print the test without prompting for answers.
.RS
.RE
.PP
To get a list of all purity tests available globally on your
system, run \f[B]purity-ng\ list\f[].
.SH AUTHORS
.PP
\f[B]purity\f[] was originally written by Eric Lechner in 1989.
\f[B]purity-ng\f[] is a reimplementation of purity in Python for
modern systems, written by Simon Fondrie-Teitler and Luke Faraone.
.PP
This manual page was written by Luke Faraone.
.SH BUGS
.PP
If you find bugs in the application, please report these to
<https://bugs.launchpad.net/purity-ng> or to your distribution's
distributor.
.SH SEE ALSO
.PP
\f[B]purity\f[](6)
.PP
Additional documentation is available online at
<http://packages.python.org/purity-ng>.

