================================
 Segway |version| documentation
================================
:Homepage: http://noble.gs.washington.edu/proj/segway
:Author: Michael M. Hoffman <mmh1 at uw dot edu>
:Organization: University of Washington
:Address: Department of Genome Sciences, PO Box 355065
          Seattle, WA 98195-5065, United States of America
:Copyright: 2009-2011 Michael M. Hoffman
:Last updated: |today|

.. currentmodule:: segway
.. include:: <isogrk3.txt>
.. include:: <isonum.txt>

For a conceptual overview see the paper:

  Michael M. Hoffman, Orion J. Buske, Zhiping Weng, Jeff A. Bilmes,
  William Stafford Noble. Unsupervised pattern discovery in human
  chromatin structure through genomic segmentation. Submitted.

Michael <mmh1 at uw dot edu> can send you a copy of the latest
manuscript.

Quick start
===========

Installation and configuration
------------------------------

1. To install Segway in your own user directories, execute this
   command from :program:`bash`::

     python <(wget -O - http://noble.gs.washington.edu/proj/segway/install.py)

2. The installer will ask you some questions where to install things
   and will install (if necessary) HDF5, NumPy, any other
   prerequisites, and Segway. It will also tell you about changes it
   wants to make to your ``~/.bashrc`` to set up your environment
   properly.

3. Log out and back in to source the new ``~/.bashrc``.

4. If you are using SGE, your system administrator must set up a
   ``mem_requested`` resource for Segway to work. This can be done by
   installing Segway and then running ``python -m
   segway.cluster.sge_setup``.

Acquiring data
--------------

5. Observation data is stored with the genomedata system.
   <http://noble.gs.washington.edu/proj/genomedata/>. There is a small
   Genomedata archive for testing that comes with Segway, that is used
   in the below steps. You can get it using::

     wget http://noble.gs.washington.edu/proj/segway/2011/test.genomedata

Running Segway
--------------
6. Use the ``segway train`` command to discover patterns in the test
   data. Here, we specify that we want Segway to discover four unique
   patterns::

     segway --num-labels=4 train test.genomedata traindir

7. Use the ``segway identify`` command to create the segmentation,
   which partitions the genome into regions labeled with one of the
   four discovered patterns::

     segway identify test.genomedata traindir identifydir

Results
-------

8. The ``identifydir/segway.bed.gz`` file has each segment as a
   separate line in the BED file, and can be used for further processing.

9. The ``identifydir/segway.layered.bed.gz`` file is designed for
   easier visualization on a genome browser. It has thick lines where
   a segment is present and thin lines where it is not. This is not as
   easy for a computer to parse, but it is more useful visually.

10. You can also perform further analysis of the segmentation and
    trained parameters using Segtools
    <http://noble.gs.washington.edu/proj/segtools/>.

Installation
============

Segway requires the following prerequisites:

You need either Sun Grid Engine (SGE; now called Oracle Grid Engine),
or Platform Load Sharing Facility (LSF) and FedStage DRMAA for LSF.
You need Graphical Models Toolkit (GMTK), which you can get at
<http://noble.gs.washington.edu/proj/segway/gmtk/gmtk-20091016.tar.gz>.
You probably need to install NumPy separately.

You will need these Python packages, which will probably be installed
automatically by ``pip install segway`` or ``easy_install segway``:
``genomedata>0.1.5``, ``textinput``, ``optbuild>0.1.6``,
``optplus>0.1.0``, ``tables>2.0.4``, ``forked-path``, ``colorbrewer``,
``segway``, ``drmaa>=0.4a3``.

If you are installing as an individual user, we have developed an
``install.py`` script that should make this easy.

If you are installing as a system administrator, we recommend using
``pip install segway`` or ``easy_install segway`` without configuring
``~/.pydistutils.cfg`` to install in your home directory. This should
install many of the prerequisites as well.

Cluster configuration
---------------------
If FedStage DRMAA for LSF is installed, Segway should be ready to go
on LSF out of the box.

If you are using SGE, someone with cluster manager privileges on your
cluster must have Segway installed within their PYTHONPATH or
systemwide and then run ``python -m segway.cluster.sge_setup``. This
sets up a consumable mem_requested attribute for every host on your
cluster for more efficient memory use.

The workflow
============
Segway accomplishes four major tasks from a single command-line. It--

  1. **generates** an unsupervised segmentation model and initial
     parameters appropriate for this data;
  2. **trains** parameters of the model starting with the initial
     parameters; and
  3. **identifies** segments in this data with the model.
  4. calculates **posterior** probability for each possible segment
  label at each position.

.. todo: block diagram

Technical description
---------------------
More specifically, Segway performs the following steps:

  1. Acquires data in ``genomedata`` format
  2. Generates an appropriate model for unsupervised
     segmentation (``segway.str``, ``segway.inc``) for use by GMTK
  3. Generates appropriate initial parameters (``input.master``
     or ``input.*.master``) for use by GMTK
  4. Writes the data in a format usable by GMTK
  5. Call GMTK to perform expectation maximization (EM) training,
     resulting in a parameter file (``params.params``)
  6. Call GMTK to perform Viterbi decoding of the observations
     using the generated model and discovered parameters
  7. Convert the GMTK Viterbi results into BED format
     (``segway.bed.gz``) for use in a genome browser, or by
     Segtools <http://noble.gs.washington.edu/proj/segtools/>, or other tools

  8. Call GMTK to perform posterior decoding of the observations
     using the generated model and discovered parameters
  9. Convert the GMTK posterior results into bedGraph format
     (``posterior.seg*.bedGraph.gz``) for use in a genome browser or
     other tools
  10. Use a distributed computing system to parallelize all of the
      GMTK tasks listed above, and track and predict their resource
      consumption to maximize efficiency
  11. Generate reports on the established likelihood at each round of
      training (``likelihood.*.tab``)

..  12. (not implemented) Call Segtools
..      <http://noble.gs.washington.edu/proj/segtools/> for a more
..      comprehensive report and plots on the resulting segmentation.

The **identify** and **posterior** tasks can run simultaneously, as
they depend only on the results of **train**, and not each other.

Data selection
==============
Segway accepts data only in the Genomedata format. The Genomedata
package includes utilities to convert from BED, wiggle, and bedGraph
formats. By default, Segway uses all the continuous data tracks in a
Genomedata archive.

Tracks
------

You may specify a subset of tracks using the :option:`--track` option
which may be repeated. For example::

    segway --track dnasei --track h3k36me3

will include the two tracks ``dnasei`` and ``h3k36me3`` and no others.

It is very important that you always specify the same
:option:`--track` options at all stages in the Segway workflow.
There is also a special track name, ``dinucleotide``. When you specify
``--track=dinucleotide``, Segway will create a track containing
the dinucleotide that starts at a particular position. This can help
in modeling CpG or G+C bias.

.. _positions:

Positions
---------

By default, Segway runs analyses on the whole genome. This can be
incredibly time-consuming, especially for training. In reality,
training (and even identification) on a smaller proportion of the
genome is often sufficient. There are also regions as the genome such
as those containing many repetitive sequences, which can cause
artifacts in the training process. The :option:`--exclude-coords`\=\
*file* and :option:`--include-coords`\=\ *file* options specify BED
files with regions that should be excluded or included respectively.
If both are specified, then inclusions are prcoessed first and the
exclusions are then taken out of the included regions.

.. using warning rather than note because it works with multi-para stuff in LaTeX

.. todo: is this still the case?

.. warning::

  BED format uses zero-based half-open coordinates, just like
  Python. This means that the first nucleotide on chromosome 1 is
  specified as::

      chr1    0    1

  The UCSC Genome Browser and Ensembl web interfaces, as well as the
  wiggle formats use the one-based fully-closed convention, where it is
  called *chr1:1-1*.

For example, the ENCODE Data Coordination Center at University of
California Santa Cruz keeps the coordinates of the ENCODE pilot
regions in this format at
<http://hgdownload.cse.ucsc.edu/goldenPath/hg19/encodeDCC/referenceSequences/encodePilotRegions.hg19.bed>
(GRCh37/hg19) and
<http://hgdownload.cse.ucsc.edu/goldenPath/hg18/database/encodeRegions.txt.gz>
(NCBI36/hg18). For human whole-genome studies, these regions have nice
properties since they mark 1 percent of the genome, and were carefully
picked to include a variety of different gene densities, and a number
of more limited studies provide data just for these regions. All
coordinates are in terms of the GRCh37 assembly of the human reference
genome (also called ``hg19`` by UCSC).

.. todo: convert to hg19
.. There is a file containing only nine of these regions at
   <http://noble.gs.washington.edu/proj/segway/data/regions.manual.1.tab>,
   which covers 0.15% of the human genome, and is useful for training.


After reading in data from a Genomedata archive, and selecting a
smaller subset with :option:`--exclude-coords` and
:option:`--include-coords`, the final included regions are referred to
as *windows*, and are supplied to GMTK for inference. There is no
direction connection between the data in different windows during any
inference process--the windows are treated independently.

Resolution
----------
In order to speed up the inference process, you may downsample the
data to a different resolution using the :option:`--resolution`\=\
*res* option. This means that Segway will partition the input
observations into fixed windows of size *res* and perform inference on
the mean of the observation averaged along the fixed window. This can
result in a large speedup at the cost of losing the highest possible precision.

You must use the same resolution in both training and identification.

Model generation
================

Segway generates a model (``segway.str``) and initial parameters
(``input.master``) appropriate to a dataset using the GMTKL
specification language and the GMTK master parameter file format. Both
of these are described more fully in the GMTK documentation (cite),
and the default structure and starting parameters are described more
fully in the Segway article.

The starting parameters are generated using data from the whole
genome, which can be quickly found in the Genomedata archive. Even if
you are training on a subset of the genome, this information is not
used.

You can tell Segway just to generate these files and not to perform
any inference using the :option:`--dry-run` option.

Using :option:`--num-instances`\=\ *starts* will generate multiple copies of the
``input.master`` file, named ``input.0.master``, ``input.1.master``,
and so on, with different randomly picked initial parameters. You may
substitute your own ``input.master`` files but I recommend starting
with a Segway-generated template. This will help avoid some common
pitfalls. In particular, if you are going to perform training on your
model, you must ensure that the ``input.master`` file retains the same
``#ifdef`` structure for parameters you wish to train. Otherwise, the
values discovered after one round of training will not be used in
subsequent rounds, or in the identify or posterior stages.

You can use the :option:`--num-labels`\=\ *labels* option to specify the
number of segment labels to use in the model (default 2). You can set
this to a single number or a range with Python slice notation. For
example, ``--num-labels=5:20:5`` will result in 5, 10, and 15 labels
being tried. If you specify :option:`--num-instances`\=\ *starts*, then
there will be *starts* different instances for each of the *labels*
labels tried.

The question of finding the right number of labels is a difficult one.
Mathematical criteria, such as the Bayesian information criterion,
would usually suggest using higher numbers of labels. However, the
results are difficult for a human to interpret in this case. This is
why we usually use ~25 labels for a segmentation of dozens of input
tracks. If you use a small number of input tracks you can probably use
a smaller number of labels.

There is an experimental :option:`--num-sublabels`\=\ *sublabels*
option that enables hierarchical segmentation, where each segment
label is divided into a number of segment sublabels. This may require
some manipulation of model parameter files to actually be useful. The
output segmentation will be defined in terms of individual sublabels,
where the output label number is equal to the (super) segment label
times the number of sublabels per label plus the sublabel number.

.. TODO: reword last sentences so they are more clear

Segway allows multiple models of the values of a continuous
observation tracks using three different probability distributions: a
normal distribution (``--distribution=norm``), a normal distribution
on asinh-transformed data (``--distribution=asinh_norm``, the
default), or a gamma distribution (``--distribution=gamma``). For
gamma distributions, Segway generates initial parameters by converting
mean |mu| and variance |sigma|:sup:`2` to shape *k* and scale \theta
using the equations |mu| = *k*\ |theta| and |sigma|:sup:`2` =
*k*\ |theta|:sup:`2`. The ideal methodology for setting gamma parameter
values is less well-understood, and it also requires an unreleased
version of GMTK. I recommend the use of ``asinh_norm`` in most cases.

Segment duration model
----------------------

Hard length constraints
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The :option:`--seg-table`\=\ *file* option allows specification of a
*segment table* that specifies minimum and maximum segment lengths for
various labels. Here is an example of a segment table::

  label	len
  1:4	200:2200:200
  0	200::200
  4:	200::200

The header line with ``label`` in one column and ``len`` in another is
mandatory. Slices are specified with a colon as in Python, and are
half-open. So label ``1:4`` specifies labels 1, 2, and 3. For those
labels, segment lengths between 200 and 2200 are allowed, with a 200
bp ruler. The ruler for every label must match each other and the
option set with :option:`--ruler-scale`\=\ *scale*. This may become
more free in the future. The ruler is an efficient heuristic that
decreases the memory used during inference at the cost of also
decreasing the precision with which the segment duration model acts.
Essentially, it allows the duration model to switch the behavior of
the rest of the model only after a multiple of *scale* bp has passed.
Using ``4:`` for a label means all labels 4 or higher, and they are
set to a minimum segment length of 200 and no maximum segment length.

Due to the lack of an epilogue in the model, it is possible to get one
segment per sequence that actually does not meet. This is expected and
will be fixed in a future release.

Use these segment lengths along with the supervised learning feature
with caution. If you try to create something impossible with your
supervision labels, such as defining a 2300-bp region to have label 1,
which you have already constrained to have a maximum segment length of
2200, GMTK will produce the dreaded zero clique error and your
training run will fail. Don't do this. In practice, due to the
imprecision introduced by the 200-bp ruler, a region labeled in the
supervision process with label 1 that is only 2000 bp long may also
cause the training process to fail with a zero clique error. If this
happens either decrease the size of the ruler, increase the size of
the maximum segment length, or decrease the size of the supervision region.

Soft length prior
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

There is also a way to add a soft prior on the length distribution,
which will tend to make the expected segment length 100000, but will
still allow data that strongly suggests another length control. The
default expected segment length of 100000 can't be changed at the
moment but will in a future version.

You can control the strength of the prior relative to observed
transitions with the :option:`--prior-strength`\=\ *strength* option.
Setting ``--prior-strength=1`` means there are as many pseudocounts
due to the prior as the number of nucleotides in the training regions.

The :option:`--segtransition-weight-scale`\=\ *scale* option controls
the strength of the prior in another way. It controls the strength of
the transition model relative to the data from the observed tracks.
The default *scale* of 1 gives the soft transition model equal
strength to a single data track. Using higher or lower values uses
comparatively greater or lesser weight to the probability from the
soft transition model. Therefore the impact of the prior will be a
function of both :option:`--segtransition-weight-scale` and
:option:`--prior-strength`.

Task selection
==============

Segway will perform either (a) model generation and training or (b)
identification separately, so it is possible to train on a subset of
the genome and identify on the whole thing. To train, use::

  segway train GENOMEDATA TRAINDIR

To identify, specify the TRAINDIR you used in the first round::

  segway identify GENOMEDATA TRAINDIR IDENTIFYDIR

In both cases, replace GENOMEDATA with the Genomedata archive you're
using. The use of :option:`--dry-run` will cause Segway to generate
appropriate model and observation files but not to actually perform
any inference or queue any jobs. This can be useful when
troubleshooting a model or task.

Train task
==========
Most users will generate the model at training time, but to specify
your own model there are the :option:`--structure`\=\ *filename* and
:option:`--input-master`\=\ *filename* options. You can simultaneously
run multiple *instances* of EM training in parallel, specified with the
:option:`--instances`\=\ *instances* option. Each instance consists of
a number of rounds, which are broken down into individual tasks for
each training region. The results from each region for a particular
instance and round are combined in a quick *bundle* task. It results in
the generation of a parameter file like ``params.3.params.18`` where
``3`` is the instance index and ``18`` is the round index. Training for
a particular instance continues until at least one of these criteria is
met:

* the likelihood from one round is only a small improvement from the
  previous round; or
* 100 rounds have completed.

Specifically, the "small improvement" is defined in terms of the
current likelihood :math:`L_n` and the log likelihood from the
previous round :math:`L_{n-1}`, such that training continues while

.. math::

   \left| \dfrac{\log L_n - \log L_{n-1}}{\log L_{n-1}} \right| \ge 10^{-5}.

This constant will likely become an option in a future version of
Segway.

As EM training produces diminishing returns over time, it is likely
that one can obtain acceptably trained parameters well before these
criteria are met. Training can be a time-consuming process. You may
wish to train only on a subset of your data, as described in
:ref:`positions`.

When all instances are complete, Segway picks the parameter set with the
best likelihood and copies it to ``params.params``.

There are two different modes of training available, unsupervised and
semisupervised.

Unsupervised training
---------------------
By default, Segway trains in unsupervised mode, which is a form of
clustering. In this mode, it tries to find recurring patterns
suggested by the data without any additional preconceptions of which
regions should be tied together.

Semisupervised training
-----------------------
Using the :option:`--semisupervised`\=\ *file* option, one can specify
a BED file as a list of regions used s supervision labels. The *name*
field of the BED File specifies a label to be enforced during
training. For example, with the line::

    chr3    400    800   2

one can enforce that those positions will have label 2. You might do
this if you had specific reason to believe that these regions were
enhancers and wanted to find similar patterns in your data tracks.
Using smaller labels first (such as 0) is probably better. Supervision
labels are not enforced during the identify task.

To simulate fully supervised training, simply supply supervision
labels for the entire training region.

None of the supervision labels can overlap with each other. You should
combine any overlapping labels before specifying them to Segway.

General options
---------------
The :option:`--dont-train`\=\ *file* option specifies a file with a
newline-delimited list of parameters not to train. By default, this
includes the ``dpmf_always``, ``start_seg``, and all GMTK
DeterministicCPT parameters. You are unlikely to use this unless you
are generating your own models manually.

Recovery
--------
Since training can take a long time, this increases the probability
that external factors such as a system failure will cause a training
run to fail before completion. You can use the :option:`--recover`\=\
*dirname* option to specify a previous work directory you're
recovering from.

Identify task
=============

The **identify** mode of Segway uses the Viterbi algorithm to decode
the most likely path of segments, given data and a set of parameters,
which can come from the **train** task. Identify runs considerably
more quickly than training. While the underlying inference task is
very similar, it must be completed on each region of interest only
once rather than hundreds of times as in training.

You can either manually set individual input master, parameter, and
structure files, or implicitly use the files generated by the
**train** task completed in *traindir*, and referenced in *traindir*\
``/train.tab``. If you are using training data from an old version of
Segway, you must either create a ``train.tab`` file or specify the
parameters manually, using :option:`--structure`,
:option:`--input-master`, and :option:`--trainable-params`.

The :option:`--bed`\=\ *bedfile* option specifies where the
segmentation should go. If *bedfile* ends in ``.gz``, then Segway uses
gzip compression. The default is ``segway.bed.gz`` in the working
directory.

You can load the generated BED files into a genome browser. Because
the files can be large, I recommend placing them on your web site and
supplying the URL to the genome browser rather than uploading the file
directly. When using the UCSC genome browser, the bigBed utility may
be helpful in speeding access to parts of a segmentation.

The output is in BED format
(http://genome.ucsc.edu/FAQ/FAQformat.html#format1), and includes
columns for chromosome, start, and end (in zero-based, half-open
format), and the label. Other columns to the right are used for
display purposes, such as coloring the browser display, and can be
safely ignored for further processing. We use colors from ColorBrewer
(http://colorbrewer2.org/).

Recovery
--------
The :option:`--recover`\=\ *dirname* allows recovery from an
interrupted identify task. Segway will requeue jobs that never
completed before, skipping any windows that have already completed.

Posterior task
==============
The **posterior** inference task of Segway estimates for each position
of interest the probability that the model has a particular segment
label given the data. This information is delivered in a series of
numbered wiggle files, one for each segment label. The individual
values will vary from 0 to 100, showing the percentage probability at
each position for the label in that file. In most positions, the value
will be 0 or 100, and substantially reproduce the Viterbi path
determined from the **identify** task.

Posterior results can be useful in determining regions of ambiguous
labeling or in diagnosing new models. The mostly binary nature of the
posterior assignments is a consequence of the design of the default
Segway model, and it is possible to design a model that does not have
this feature. Doing so is left as an exercise to the reader.

.. todo: name the files

You may find you need to convert the bedGraph files to bigWig format
first to allow small portions to be uploaded to a genome browser
piecewise.

.. todo: same options for specifying model and parameters as identify

Creating layered output
=======================

Segway produces BED Files as output with the segment label in the name
field. While this is the most sensible way of interchanging the
segmentation with other programs, it can be difficult to visualize. We
supply a :program:`segway-layer` program that transforms segmentation
BED files into "layered" BED files with rows for each possible Segment
label and thick boxes at the location of each label. This is what we
show in the screenshot figure of the Segway article. This is much
easier to see at low levels of magnification. The layers are also
labeled, removing the need to distinguish them exclusively by color.
:program:`segway-layer` supports the use of standard input and output
by using ``-`` as a filename, following a common Unix convention.
Segway automatically runs :program:`segway-layer` at the end of an
identify task.

The mnemonic files used by Segway and Segtools have a simple format.
They are tab-delimited files with a header that has the following
columns: ``old``, ``new``, and ``description``. The ``old`` column
specifies the original label in the BED file, which is always produced
as an integer by Segway. The ``new`` column allows the specification
of a short alphanumeric mnemonic for the label. The ``description``
column is unused by :program:`segway-layer`, but you can use it to add
helpful annotations for humans examining the list of labels, or to
save label mnemonics you used previously. The row order of the
mnemonic file matters, as the layers will be laid down in a similar
order. Mnemonics sharing the same alphabetical prefix (for example,
``A0`` and ``A1``) or characters before a period (for example, ``0.0``
and ``0.1``) will be rendered with the same color.

:program:`segtools-gmtk-parameters` in the Segtools package can automatically
identify an initial hierarchical labeling of segmentation parameters.
This can be very useful as a first approximation of assigning meaning
to segment labels.

A simple mnemonic file appears below::

  old	new	description
  0	TSS	transcription start site
  2	GE	gene end
  1	D	dead zone

Technical matters
=================

Working files
-------------

Segway must create a number of working files in order to accomplish
its tasks, and it does this in the directory specified by the required
*workdir* argument.

The observation files can be quite large, taking up 8 bytes per track
per position and cannot be compressed. Since they are needed multiple
times during training, they are generated in the working directory. As
an exception, if you turn off training and specify only the identify
task, the files will be generated independently on temproary space on
each machine. This is because otherwise they could take terabytes for
identifying on the whole human genome with dozens of tracks.

To change the location of the observation files, use the
:option:`--observations`\=\ *dir* option. This can be helpful when you
plan to conduct multiple training tasks on the same data but with
different parameters. Be careful to finish observation writing for at
least one task first, so all the observations will be written out,
before trying to start the next task. If you fail to do this, race
conditions may lead to undefined effects. Also, all data selection
options (:option:`--track`, :option:`--include-coords`,
:option:`--exclude-coords`) must be exactly the same when sharing
observation files. Otherwise you are likely to get unexplained failures.

.. todo: comp add a check in observation directory to make sure tracks and coords are same
.. todo: comp add a lock file to eliminate race condition.

You will find a full description of all the working files in the
**Files** section

.. todo: comp above should be a link, not bold

Distributed computing
---------------------
Segway can currently perform the training, identification, and
posterior tasks only using a cluster controllable with the DRMAA
interface. I have only tested it against Sun Grid Engine and Platform
LSF, but it should be possible to work with other DRMAA-compatible
distributed computing systems, such as PBS Pro, PBS/TORQUE, Condor, or
GridWay. If you are interested in using one of these systems, please
contact Michael so he correct all the fine details. A standalone
version is planned, but for now you must have a clustering system. Try
installing the free SGE on your workstation if you want to run Segway
without a full clustering system.

The :option:`--cluster-opt` option allows the specification of native
options to your clustering system---those options you might pass
to ``qsub`` (SGE) or ``bsub`` (LSF).

.. todo:  comp include SGE and LSF cluster-opt demos

Memory usage
------------
Inference on complex models or long sequences can be memory-intensive.
In order to work efficiently when it is not always easy to predict
memory use in advance, Segway controls the memory use of its subtasks
on a cluster with a trial-and-error approach. It will submit jobs to
your clustering system specifying the amount of memory they are
expected to take up. Your clustering system should allocate these jobs
such that the amount of memory on one host is not overcommitted. If a
job takes up more memory than allocated, then it will be killed and
restarted with a larger amount of memory allocated, along the
progression specified in gibibytes by :option:`--mem-usage`\=\
*progression*. The default *progression* is 2,3,4,6,8,10,12,14,15.

We usually train on regions of no more than 2,000,000 frames, where a
single frame contains the number of nucleotides set by the
:option:`--resolution` option. If you use more than that many, GMTK
might run out of dynamic range. This manifests itself as a "zero
clique error." Identify mode rescales probabilities at every frame so
that this is not a problem. However, you will probably want to split
the input sequences somewhat because larger sequences make more
difficult work units (greater memory and run time costs) and thereby
impede efficient parallelization. The :option:`--split-sequences`\=\
*size* option will split up sequences into windows with *size* frames
each. The default *size* is 2,000,000. Decreasing to 500,000 will
greatly improve speed at the cost of more artefacts at split boundaries.

Reporting
---------
Segway produces a number of logs of its activity during tasks, which
can be useful for analyzing its performance or troubleshooting. These
are all in the *workdir*/log directory.

Shell scripts
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Segway produces three shell scripts in the log directory that you can
use to replay its subtasks at different levels of abstractions. The
top-level ``segway.sh`` records the command line used to run Segway.
The ``run.sh`` script gives you the GMTK commands called by Segway. A
small number of these are still produced when :option:`--dry-run` is
specified. The ``details.sh`` script contains the exact commands
dispatched by Segway, including wrapper commands that monitor memory
usage, create and delete local temporary files with observation data,
and convert GMTK's output ot BED, among other things.

Summary reports
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The ``jobs.tab`` file contains a tab-delimited file with each job
Segway dispatched in a different row, reporting on job identifier
(``jobid``), job name (``jobname``), GMTK program (``prog``), number
of segment labels (``num_segs``), number of frames (``num_frames``),
maximum memory usage (``maxvmem``), CPU time (``cpu``) and exit/error
status (``exit_status``). Jobs are written as they are completed. The
exit status is useful for determining whether the job succeeded
(status 0) or failed (any other value, which is sometimes numeric, and
sometimes text, depending on the clustering system used).

The ``likelihood.*.tab`` files each track the progression of
likelihood during a single instance of EM training. The file has a
single column, one for each round of training, which contains the log
likelihood. More positive values are better.

GMTK reports
~~~~~~~~~~~~
The ``jt_info.txt`` and ``jt_info.posterior.txt`` files describe how
GMTK builds a junction tree. It is of interest primarily during GMTK
troubleshooting. You are unlikely to use it.

Task output
~~~~~~~~~~~

The ``output`` directory contains the output of the actual GMTK
commands run by Segway. The ``o`` directory contains standard output
and the ``e`` directory contains standard error. If a job fails and
repeats, the output from the new job is appended to the old. The
:option:`--verbosity`\=\ *verbosity* option controls how much
diagnostic information that GMTK writes into these files. The default
and minimum value is ``0``. Raise this value for more information, and
see the GMTK documentation for a description of various levels of
verbosity. Setting :option:`verbosity`\=\ ``30`` can be particularly
helpful in diagnosing model problems. Keep in mind that very high
values (above ``60``) will produce tons of output---maybe
terabytes.

Performance
-----------
Some factors that affect compute time and memory requirements:

* the length of the longest region you are training or identifying on
* the number of tracks
* the number of labels

The longest region forms a bottleneck during training because Segway
cannot start the next round of training before all regions in the
previous round are done. So if you specify three regions, one of which
is 10 Mbp long, and the other are 100 kbp, the 10 Mbp region is going
to be a limiting factor. You can use :option:`--split-sequences` (see
above) to put an upper bound on region size.

Troubleshooting
===============

When Segway reports "end of memory progression reached without
success", this usually means that dispatched GMTK tasks failed
repeatedly. Look in the ``output/e`` files to see what the cause of
the underlying error was. Also ``log/jobs.tab`` lists all the jobs and
whether they reported an error in the form of nonzero exit status.

Are your bundle jobs failing? This might be because an accumulator
file (written by individual job) is corrupted or truncated. This can
happen when you run out of disk space.

If it is not immediately apparent why a job is failing, it is probably
useful to look in ``log/run.sh`` to find the command line that Segway
uses to call GMTK. Try running that to see if it gives you any clues.
You may want to switch the GMTK option -verbosity 0 to -verbosity 30
to get more information.

An error like::

  ERROR: discrete observed random variable 'presence_dnase', frame 0, line 23, specifies a feature element 14:14 that is out of discrete range ([23:45] inclusive) of observation matrix

probably indicates that you are incorrectly mixing and matching
``train.tab`` files and ``segway.str`` files from different training
runs.

/net/noble/vol2/home/avinash/shortcuts/multipass/segway_src/runs/2011/0413-segway-coordinated-jan2011/k562.coordinated/t20110414/

Names used by Segway
====================

Workdir files
-------------

Segway expects to be able to create many of these files anew. To avoid
data loss, by default, it will quit if they already exist. If you use
the :option:`--clobber` option, Segway will overwrite the whole
workdir instead.

.. tabularcolumns:: lp{4.5in}

=================================================== =====================================================
 Filename                                            Description
=================================================== =====================================================
``accumulators/``                                   intermediate files used to pass E-step results to
                                                    the M-step of EM training
|rarr| ``acc.``\ \*\ ``.bin``                       accumulator for a particular instance and
                                                    region (reused each round)
``auxiliary/``                                      miscelaneous model files
|rarr| ``dont_train.list``                          defines list of hidden random variables
                                                    that are not trained
|rarr| ``segway.inc``                               C preprocessor (``cpp``) include file
                                                    used in structure
``likelihood/``                                     GMTK's report of the log likelihood for
                                                    the most recent M-step of EM training
|rarr| ``likelihood.``\ \*\ ``.ll``                 contains text of the last log likelihood value for an
                                                    instance. Segway uses this to decide when to
                                                    stop training
``log/``                                            diagnostic information
|rarr| ``details.sh``                               script file that includes the exact
                                                    command-lines queued by Segway, with wrapper scripts
|rarr| ``jobs.tab``                                 tab-delimeted summary of jobs queued,
                                                    including resource informatoin and exit status
|rarr| ``jt_info.txt``                              log file used by GMTK when creating a junction tree
|rarr| ``jt_info.posterior.txt``                    log file used by GMTK when creating a junction tree
                                                    in posterior mode
|rarr| ``likelihood.``\ \*\ ``.tab``                tab-delimited summary of likelihood by training
                                                    instance; can be used to examine  how fast
                                                    training converges
|rarr| ``run.sh``                                   list of commands run by Segway, not
                                                    including wrappers
                                                    that create and clean up temporary files such as
                                                    observations used during identification
|rarr| ``segway.sh``                                reports the command-line used to run Segway itself
``observations/``                                   decompressed, and potentially large raw observation
                                                    files created from a Genomedata archive located
                                                    elsewhere
|rarr| \*\ ``.``\ \*\ ``.float32``                  continuous data for a particular region
|rarr| \*\ ``.``\ \*\ ``.int``                      indicator data (present/absent) for a particular
                                                    region
|rarr| ``float32.list``                             list of continuous data files
|rarr| ``int.list``                                 list of indicator data files
|rarr| ``observations.tab``                         tab-delimited description of observations used|rarr| Used
                                                    to check that an existing directory specified with
                                                    :option:`--observations` matches the data specified
                                                    at the command-line
``output/``                                         diagnostic output of individual GMTK jobs
``output/e/``                                       stderr
``output/e/0,1,``...                                stderr for a particular training instance (0, 1,
                                                    ...)
``output/e/identify``                               stderr for identification
``output/o/``                                       stdout
``params/``                                         generated and trained parameters for a given instance
|rarr| ``input.``\ \*\ ``.master``                  generated hyperparameters and starting parameters
|rarr| ``input.master``                             best set of hyperparameters and starting parameters
|rarr| ``params.``\ \*\ ``.params.``\ \*            trained parameters for a given instance and round
|rarr| ``params.``\ \*\ ``.params``                 final trained parameters for a given instance
|rarr| ``params.params``                            best final set of trained parameters
``segway.bed.gz``                                   segmentation in BED format
``segway.str``                                      dynamic Bayesian network structure
``train.tab``                                       important file locations and hyperparameters used in training, to be passed to identify
``triangulation/``                                  triangulation files used for DBN interface
|rarr| ``segway.str.``\ \*\ ``.``\ \*\ ``.trifile`` triangulation file
``viterbi/``                                        intermediate BED files created during distributed Viterbi decoding,
                                                    which get merged into ``segway.bed.gz``
=================================================== =====================================================

Job names
---------

In order to watch Segway's progress on your cluster, it is helpful to
understand how it names jobs. A job name for the training task might
look like this::

  emt0.1.34.traindir.ed03201cea2047399d4cbcc4b62f9827

In this example, ``emt`` means expectation maximization training, the
``0`` means instance 0, the ``1`` means round 1, and the ``34`` means
window 34. The name of the training directory is ``traindir``, and
``ed03201cea2047399d4cbcc4b62f9827`` is a universally unique
identifier for this particular Segway run. This can be useful if you
want to manage all of your jobs on your clustering system with
wildcard specification. On SGE you can delete all the jobs from this
run with::

  qdel "*.ed03201cea2047399d4cbcc4b62f9827"

On LSF, use::

  bkill -J "*.ed03201cea2047399d4cbcc4b62f9827"

Jobs created in the identify (``vit``) task are
named similarly::

  vit34.identifydir.4f32630d53724f08b34a8fc58793307d

..  jt34.identifydir.4f32630d53724f08b34a8fc58793307d
.. or posterior (``jt``)

Of course, there are no instances or rounds for the identify task, so
only the sequence index is reported.

Tracks
------
Tracks are named according to their name in the Genomedata archive.
For GMTK internal use, periods are converted to underscores. There is
a special track name ``dinucleotide``. Use this track name to model a
dinucleotide symbol at each position with a 16-symbol multionmial
distribution specified in the form of a conditional probability table.

Python interface
================
I have designed Segway such that eventually one may call different
components directly from within Python.

.. To do so, import the following module: XXXcomp table here (from the setup.py)

You can then call the appropriate module through its ``main()``
function with the same arguments you would use at the command line.
For example::

  from segway import run

  GENOMEDATA_DIRNAME = "genomedata"

  run.main(["--random-starts=3", "train", GENOMEDATA_DIRNAME])

All other interfaces (the ones that do not use a ``main()`` function)
to Segway code are undocumented and should not be used. If you do use
them, know that the API may change at any time without notice.

Support
=======

For support of Segway, please write to the <segway-users@uw.edu> mailing
list, rather than writing the authors directly. Using the mailing list
will get your question answered more quickly. It also allows us to
pool knowledge and reduce getting the same inquiries over and over.
You can subscribe here:

https://mailman1.u.washington.edu/mailman/listinfo/segway-users

Specifically, if you want to report a bug or request a feature, please
do so using the Segway issue tracker at:

http://code.google.com/p/segway-genome/issues/

If you do not want to read discussions about other people's use of
Segway, but would like to hear about new releases and other important
information, please subscribe to <segway-announce@uw.edu> by visiting
this web page:

https://mailman1.u.washington.edu/mailman/listinfo/segway-announce

Announcements of this nature are sent to both ``segway-users`` and
``segway-announce``.

Command-line usage summary
==========================

All programs in the Segway distribution will report a brief synopsis
of expected arguments and options when the :option:`--help` option is
specified and version information when :option:`--version` is specified.

.. include:: _build/cmdline-help/segway.help.txt

Utilities
---------

.. include:: _build/cmdline-help/segway-layer.help.txt

.. include:: _build/cmdline-help/segway-winner.help.txt

Helpful commands
================
Here are some short bash scripts or one-liners that are useful:

Make a tarball of parameters and models from various directories::

    (for DIR in traindir1 traindir2; do
        echo $DIR/{auxiliary,params/input.master,params/params.params,segway.str,triangulation}
    done) | xargs tar zcvf training.params.tar.gz

.. todo: include rsync-segway script

Rsync parameters from `$REMOTEDIR` on `$REMOTEHOST` to `$LOCALDIR`::

    rsync -rtvz --exclude output --exclude posterior --exclude viterbi --exclude observations --exclude "*.observations" --exclude accumulators $REMOTEHOST:$REMOTEDIR $LOCALDIR

Print all last likelihoods::

    for X in likelihood.*.tab; do dc -e "8 k $(tail -n 2 $X | cut -f 1 | xargs echo | sed -e 's/-//g') sc sl ll lc - ll / p"; done

.. todo: research BEDTools capability here

Recover as much as possible from an incomplete identification run
without completing it. Note that this does not combine adjacent lines
of same segment. BEDTools might be able to do this for you. You will
have to create your own header.txt with appropriate track lines::

    cat header.txt <(find viterbi -type f | sort | xargs cat) | gzip -c > segway.bed.gz

