Configuration options
=====================

.. py:module:: fanstatic

Fanstatic makes available a number of configuration options. These can
be passed to the py:class:`Fanstatic` WSGI component as keyword
arguments.  They can also be configured using `Paste Deploy`_
configuration patterns (see :doc:`our Paste Deploy documentation
<paste_deploy>` for more information on that).

.. _`Paste Deploy`: http://pythonpaste.org/deploy/

hashing
-------

By default, hashing is disabled, because it needs some extra
explanation. We highly recommend enable it however, as the performance
benefits are potentially huge and it's safe to do so. See also
``devmode`` if you want to use hashing during development.

If you turn on hashing, Fanstatic will automatically include a hash in
all resource URLs it generates and injects onto web pages. Fanstatic
will respond to any resource URLs with a hash in it to cache them
forever [#well]_.

The benefit is that all resources will be cached forever by web
browsers. This means that a web browser will never talk to the server
to request a resource again once it retrieved it once, as long as it
is still in its cache. This puts less load on your web application: it
only needs to publish the resource once for a user, as long as the
resource remains in that user's cache.

If you use a server-side cache such as Squid or Varnish, the situation
is even better: these will hold on to the cached resources as well,
meaning that your web application needs to serve the resource exactly
*once*. The cache will serve them after that.

But what if you change a resource? Won't users now get the wrong, old
versions of the changed resource?  No: with hashing enabled, when you
change a resource, a *new* URL to that resource will be automatically
generated. You never will have to instruct users of your web
application to do a "shift-reload" to force all resources to reload --
the browser will see the resource URL has changed and will
automatically load a new one.

How does this work?

A hash segment in a URL looks like this::

  /fanstatic/my_library/:hash:d41d8cd98f00b204e9800998ecf8427e/my_resource.js

Since the hash value depends on the contents of the resource directory
associated with the library, the hash value, and therefore the
resource URL, will automatically change as soon as you change any
resources in the library.

devmode
-------

If you enable ``hashing``, Fanstatic will automatically calculate a
resource hash your each of your resource directories. 

Calculating a resource hash is a relatively expensive operation, and
in production you want Fanstatic to calculate the resource hash only
once per library. This is the Fanstatic default: hashes will only be
recalculated after you restart the application.

During development this is annoying however: you want the hashes to be
recalculated each time you make a change, without having to restart
the application all the time, and having a little performance impact
is no problem. You can turn on this behavior by turning on ``devmode``.

bottom
------

While CSS resources can only be included in the ``<head>`` section of
a web page, Javascript resources can be included in ``<script>`` tags
anywhere on the web page. Sometimes it pays off to do so: by including
Javascript resources at the bottom of a web page (just before the
``</body>`` closing tag), the page can already load and partially
render for the user before the Javascript files have been loaded, and
this may lead to a better user experience.

Not all Javascript files can be loaded at this time however: some
depend on being included as early as possible. You can mark a
:py:class:`Resource` as "bottom safe" if they are safe to
load at the bottom of the web page. If you then enable ``bottom``,
those Javascript resources will be loaded there. If ``bottom`` is
turned off (the default), all Javascript resources will be included
in the ``<head>`` section.

force_bottom
------------

If you enable ``force_bottom`` (default it's disabled) then if you
enable ``bottom``, *all* Javascript resources will be included at the
bottom of a web page, even if they're not marked "bottom safe".

mode
----

By default, the resource URLs included will be in the normal
human-readable (and debuggable) format for that resource.

When creating :py:class:`Resource` instances, you can specify
alternative modes for the resource, such as minified and debug
versions, by passing keyword arguments. The keyword argument name will
be the mode, and the argument is a resource path or resource that
represents the resource in that alternative mode.

You can configure Fanstatic so that it prefers a certain mode when
creating resource URLs, such as ``minified``. In this case Fanstatic
will preferentially serve minified alternatives for resources, if
available. If no minified version is available, the default resource
will be served.

rollup
------

A performance optimization to reduce the amount of requests sent by a
client is to roll up several resources into a bundle, so that all
those resources are retrieved in a single request. This way a whole
collection of resources can be served in one go.

You can create special :py:class:`Resource` instances that declare
they supersede a collection of other resources. If ``rollup`` is
enabled, Fanstatic will serve a combined resource if it finds out that
all individual resources that it supersedes are needed. If you also
declare that a resource is an ``eager_superseder``, the rolled up
resource will actually always be served, even if only some of the
superseded resources are needed.

base_url
--------

The ``base_url`` URL will be prefixed in front of all resource
URLs. This can be useful if your web framework wants the resources to
be published on a sub-URL. By default, there is no ``base_url``, and
resources are served in the script root.

Note that this can also be set as an attribute on an
:py:class:`NeededResources` instance during run-time, as this URL is
generally not known when :py:class:`NeededResources` is instantiated.

.. [#well] Well, for 10 years into the future at least.

publisher_signature
-------------------

The default publisher signature is ``fanstatic``. What this means is
that the :py:func:`Fanstatic` WSGI component will look for the string
``/fanstatic/`` in the URL path, and if it's there, will take over to
publish resources. If you would like the root for resource publication
to be something else in your application (such as ``resources``), you
can change this to another string.
