4chan-setup.py
cubes.py
distribute_setup.py
ibidem-django-util-setup.py
ibidem-util-setup.py
image_compare.py
multiping.py
setup.cfg
ibidem/__init__.py
ibidem/codejam/__init__.py
ibidem/codejam/template.py
ibidem/codejam/utilities.py
ibidem/codejam/2009/qualifier/alien_language/alien_language.py
ibidem/codejam/2009/qualifier/alien_language/sample.in
ibidem/codejam/2009/qualifier/watersheds/sample.correct
ibidem/codejam/2009/qualifier/watersheds/sample.in
ibidem/codejam/2009/qualifier/watersheds/watersheds.py
ibidem/codejam/2009/qualifier/welcome_to_codejam/sample.correct
ibidem/codejam/2009/qualifier/welcome_to_codejam/sample.in
ibidem/codejam/2009/qualifier/welcome_to_codejam/welcome.py
ibidem/codejam/2009/qualifier/welcome_to_codejam/welcome2.py
ibidem/codejam/2009/round 1a/crossing the road/crossing.py
ibidem/codejam/2009/round 1a/crossing the road/crossing2.py
ibidem/codejam/2009/round 1a/crossing the road/draw.py
ibidem/codejam/2009/round 1a/crossing the road/sample.correct
ibidem/codejam/2009/round 1a/crossing the road/sample.in
ibidem/codejam/2009/round 1a/multi-base happiness/multibase_happiness.py
ibidem/codejam/2009/round 1a/multi-base happiness/sample.correct
ibidem/codejam/2009/round 1a/multi-base happiness/sample.in
ibidem/codejam/2010/qualifier/snapper_chain/sample.correct
ibidem/codejam/2010/qualifier/snapper_chain/sample.in
ibidem/codejam/2010/qualifier/snapper_chain/snapper_chain.py
ibidem/codejam/2010/qualifier/theme_park/sample.correct
ibidem/codejam/2010/qualifier/theme_park/sample.in
ibidem/codejam/2010/qualifier/theme_park/theme_park.py
ibidem/codejam/2010/round 1b/file fix-it/file_fixit.py
ibidem/codejam/2010/round 1b/file fix-it/sample.correct
ibidem/codejam/2010/round 1b/file fix-it/sample.in
ibidem/codejam/2010/round 1b/picking up chicks/chicks.py
ibidem/codejam/2010/round 1b/picking up chicks/sample.correct
ibidem/codejam/2010/round 1b/picking up chicks/sample.in
ibidem/codejam/2010/round 1c/making chess boards/chess.py
ibidem/codejam/2010/round 1c/making chess boards/sample.correct
ibidem/codejam/2010/round 1c/making chess boards/sample.in
ibidem/codejam/2010/round 1c/rope intranet/rope.py
ibidem/codejam/2010/round 1c/rope intranet/rope_mp.py
ibidem/codejam/2010/round 1c/rope intranet/sample.correct
ibidem/codejam/2010/round 1c/rope intranet/sample.in
ibidem/django/__init__.py
ibidem/django/util.py
ibidem/fourchan/__init__.py
ibidem/fourchan/backend.py
ibidem/fourchan/gui.py
ibidem/pdfmail/__init__.py
ibidem/pdfmail/body.rst
ibidem/pdfmail/config.py
ibidem/pdfmail/csvutil.py
ibidem/pdfmail/mailutil.py
ibidem/pdfmail/pdf.py
ibidem/pdfmail/send_mail.py
ibidem/screensaver/screensaver.py
ibidem/screensaver/youtube-demoscene.desktop
ibidem/util/__init__.py
ibidem/util/downloader.py
ibidem/util/workpool.py
ibidem_util.egg-info/PKG-INFO
ibidem_util.egg-info/SOURCES.txt
ibidem_util.egg-info/dependency_links.txt
ibidem_util.egg-info/namespace_packages.txt
ibidem_util.egg-info/top_level.txt
ibidem_util.egg-info/zip-safe